skills/machine-vibration-monitoring/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: machine-vibration-monitoring
description: |
  WHAT: Connects to the STEVAL-STWINBX1 sensor board to acquire vibration data,
  configure MEMS sensors, and establish baseline vibration profiles for rotating machinery.
  WHEN: Use when the user wants to start monitoring a machine, acquire vibration data from
  the STWIN.box, configure sensor parameters, set up data logging, or compare current
  vibration levels against a stored baseline. Also use for "connect to sensor",
  "acquire vibration", "set up monitoring", or "configure STWIN".
metadata:
  author: LGDiMaggio
  version: 2.0.0
  servers: stwinbox-sensor-mcp, vibration-analysis-mcp
  tags: vibration, condition-monitoring, STWIN.box, MEMS-sensors, industrial
---

# Machine Vibration Monitoring

You are helping the user set up and operate vibration-based condition monitoring
on rotating machinery using the **STEVAL-STWINBX1 (STWIN.box)** sensor node.

## System Architecture

The STWIN.box is an industrial-grade sensor node with these relevant sensors:
- **IIS3DWB**: 3-axis wideband accelerometer, up to 26.7 kHz bandwidth — primary sensor for vibration
- **ISM330DHCX**: 6-axis IMU with machine-learning core, up to 6.7 kHz
- **IIS2ICLX**: High-accuracy 2-axis inclinometer
- **STTS22H**: Temperature sensor (±0.5 °C accuracy)

The board runs **FP-SNS-DATALOG2** firmware and communicates over **USB-HID**.
Two MCP servers handle acquisition and analysis.

## Available MCP Tools

### Sensor Server (stwinbox-sensor-mcp)
- `datalog2_connect` — Connect via USB-HID
- `datalog2_start_acquisition(name, description, duration_s)` — Start logging; `duration_s` auto-stops
- `datalog2_stop_acquisition` — Stop manual-mode acquisition
- `datalog2_get_device_info` — Device/firmware info
- `datalog2_list_sensors` — Active sensors with ODR/FS
- `datalog2_configure_sensor` — Enable/disable, set ODR/FS
- `datalog2_tag_acquisition` — Add event tags during acquisition

### Analysis Server (vibration-analysis-mcp)
- `load_signal` — Load data from file or DATALOG2 acquisition folder
- `compute_fft_spectrum` — FFT magnitude spectrum
- `find_spectral_peaks` — Detect dominant frequency peaks
- `assess_vibration_severity` — ISO 10816 severity classification
- `diagnose_vibration` — Full automated diagnosis pipeline

## Workflow: First-Time Setup

When a user wants to monitor a new machine, follow these steps:

1. **Connect to the board**
   - `datalog2_connect` — auto-discovers the STWIN.box over USB-HID
   - `datalog2_get_device_info` — confirm firmware version and board identity

2. **Configure sensors for the application**
   - `datalog2_list_sensors` — see current sensor configuration (ODR, FS, enabled)
   - Ask the user about machine type and expected shaft speed (RPM)
   - `datalog2_configure_sensor` — enable/disable sensors, adjust ODR and full-scale
   - Typical configurations:
     - **Wideband vibration**: IIS3DWB at 26667 Hz ODR — best for bearing analysis
     - **General purpose**: ISM330DHCX at 6667 Hz — good for unbalance/misalignment

3. **Acquire baseline data**
   - `datalog2_start_acquisition(name="baseline", description="...", duration_s=5)`
     - The `duration_s` parameter auto-stops the acquisition server-side (no round-trip delay)
     - Returns the acquisition folder path
   - `load_signal(file_path="<acquisition_folder>", sensor_name="iis3dwb_acc")`
     - Sample rate is auto-detected from device config
   - `compute_fft_spectrum(data_id="...", channel="X")` — compute the FFT
   - `assess_vibration_severity(data_id="...", machine_group="group1")` — ISO 10816
   - Present this as the baseline vibration signature

## Workflow: Routine Monitoring

1. `datalog2_connect` → `datalog2_start_acquisition(duration_s=5)` → `load_signal`
2. `compute_fft_spectrum` and `find_spectral_peaks` — compare against baseline
3. Flag any new peaks or amplitude increases >6 dB (factor of 2)
4. `assess_vibration_severity` — report ISO 10816 severity zone

## Key Guidance

- Always specify the **axis** when discussing vibration (X = horizontal, Y = vertical, Z = axial on typical installations)
- Vibration amplitude in **g** (acceleration) or **mm/s** (velocity) — clarify units
- Frequency resolution = sample_rate / N_samples. For 1 Hz resolution at 26667 Hz sample rate you need 26667 samples (~1 second)
- The IIS3DWB is the preferred sensor for bearing fault detection due to its high bandwidth
- The ISM330DHCX is suitable for general unbalance/misalignment detection
- Temperature from STTS22H can help correlate vibration changes with thermal effects

## Sensor Configuration Reference

See [sensor-specs.md](references/sensor-specs.md) for detailed sensor specifications
and recommended ODR (Output Data Rate) settings for different use cases.

## Example Interaction

**User**: "I want to start monitoring the vibration on our pump"

**Response approach**:
1. Ask about the pump type, RPM, and bearing information if known
2. `datalog2_connect` to the STWIN.box
3. `datalog2_list_sensors` to check current config; adjust if needed
4. `datalog2_start_acquisition(name="pump_baseline", duration_s=5)`
5. `load_signal(file_path="<folder>", sensor_name="iis3dwb_acc")`
6. `compute_fft_spectrum` + `assess_vibration_severity`
7. Present the FFT spectrum and ISO 10816 assessment
8. Suggest a monitoring interval (e.g., weekly for Zone A/B, daily for Zone C)

Commit message:

fix: report footer branding, PDF table overflow, ODR documentation
- Report footer: 'Claude Edge Predictive Maintenance' (was generic STWIN.box text)
- PDF generation: add mandatory ReportLab rules for table colWidths + Paragraph wrapping
- ODR: document nominal vs measured ODR difference (~0.3% crystal tolerance)
- load_signal docstring: explain why sample_rate may differ from configured ODR
- data_store: include nominal_odr_hz in metadata alongside measured odr_hz
- Rebuild skill zips

skills/machine-vibration-monitoring/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: machine-vibration-monitoring
description: |
  WHAT: Connects to the STEVAL-STWINBX1 sensor board to acquire vibration data,
  configure MEMS sensors, and establish baseline vibration profiles for rotating machinery.
  WHEN: Use when the user wants to start monitoring a machine, acquire vibration data from
  the STWIN.box, configure sensor parameters, set up data logging, or compare current
  vibration levels against a stored baseline. Also use for "connect to sensor",
  "acquire vibration", "set up monitoring", or "configure STWIN".
metadata:
  author: LGDiMaggio
  version: 2.0.0
  servers: stwinbox-sensor-mcp, vibration-analysis-mcp
  tags: vibration, condition-monitoring, STWIN.box, MEMS-sensors, industrial
---

# Machine Vibration Monitoring

You are helping the user set up and operate vibration-based condition monitoring
on rotating machinery using the **STEVAL-STWINBX1 (STWIN.box)** sensor node.

## System Architecture

The STWIN.box is an industrial-grade sensor node with these relevant sensors:
- **IIS3DWB**: 3-axis wideband accelerometer, up to 26.7 kHz bandwidth — primary sensor for vibration
- **ISM330DHCX**: 6-axis IMU with machine-learning core, up to 6.7 kHz
- **IIS2ICLX**: High-accuracy 2-axis inclinometer
- **STTS22H**: Temperature sensor (±0.5 °C accuracy)

The board runs **FP-SNS-DATALOG2** firmware and communicates over **USB-HID**.
Two MCP servers handle acquisition and analysis.

## Available MCP Tools

### Sensor Server (stwinbox-sensor-mcp)
- `datalog2_connect` — Connect via USB-HID
- `datalog2_start_acquisition(name, description, duration_s)` — Start logging; `duration_s` auto-stops
- `datalog2_stop_acquisition` — Stop manual-mode acquisition
- `datalog2_get_device_info` — Device/firmware info
- `datalog2_list_sensors` — Active sensors with ODR/FS
- `datalog2_configure_sensor` — Enable/disable, set ODR/FS
- `datalog2_tag_acquisition` — Add event tags during acquisition

### Analysis Server (vibration-analysis-mcp)
- `load_signal` — Load data from file or DATALOG2 acquisition folder
- `compute_fft_spectrum` — FFT magnitude spectrum
- `find_spectral_peaks` — Detect dominant frequency peaks
- `assess_vibration_severity` — ISO 10816 severity classification
- `diagnose_vibration` — Full automated diagnosis pipeline

## Workflow: First-Time Setup

When a user wants to monitor a new machine, follow these steps:

1. **Connect to the board**
   - `datalog2_connect` — auto-discovers the STWIN.box over USB-HID
   - `datalog2_get_device_info` — confirm firmware version and board identity

2. **Configure sensors for the application**
   - `datalog2_list_sensors` — see current sensor configuration (ODR, FS, enabled)
   - Ask the user about machine type and expected shaft speed (RPM)
   - `datalog2_configure_sensor` — enable/disable sensors, adjust ODR and full-scale
   - Typical configurations:
     - **Wideband vibration**: IIS3DWB at 26667 Hz ODR — best for bearing analysis
     - **General purpose**: ISM330DHCX at 6667 Hz — good for unbalance/misalignment

3. **Acquire baseline data**
   - `datalog2_start_acquisition(name="baseline", description="...", duration_s=5)`
     - The `duration_s` parameter auto-stops the acquisition server-side (no round-trip delay)
     - Returns the acquisition folder path
   - `load_signal(file_path="<acquisition_folder>", sensor_name="iis3dwb_acc")`
     - Sample rate is auto-detected from device config
   - `compute_fft_spectrum(data_id="...", channel="X")` — compute the FFT
   - `assess_vibration_severity(data_id="...", machine_group="group1")` — ISO 10816
   - Present this as the baseline vibration signature

## Workflow: Routine Monitoring

1. `datalog2_connect` → `datalog2_start_acquisition(duration_s=5)` → `load_signal`
2. `compute_fft_spectrum` and `find_spectral_peaks` — compare against baseline
3. Flag any new peaks or amplitude increases >6 dB (factor of 2)
4. `assess_vibration_severity` — report ISO 10816 severity zone

## Key Guidance

- Always specify the **axis** when discussing vibration (X = horizontal, Y = vertical, Z = axial on typical installations)
- Vibration amplitude in **g** (acceleration) or **mm/s** (velocity) — clarify units
- Frequency resolution = sample_rate / N_samples. For 1 Hz resolution at 26667 Hz sample rate you need 26667 samples (~1 second)
- The IIS3DWB is the preferred sensor for bearing fault detection due to its high bandwidth
- The ISM330DHCX is suitable for general unbalance/misalignment detection
- Temperature from STTS22H can help correlate vibration changes with thermal effects

## ODR: Nominal vs Measured

When reporting sample rate after `load_signal`, you may see a slightly different
value than the configured ODR (e.g., 26,584 Hz instead of 26,667 Hz). This is
normal hardware behavior:

- **Nominal ODR** = configured value (26,667 Hz for IIS3DWB at ODR index 0)
- **Measured ODR** = actual rate from the crystal oscillator (~0.3% tolerance)

The measured ODR is used for analysis (more accurate FFT frequency bins). When
presenting results to the user, say:

> "Sample rate: 26,584 Hz (measured; nominal 26,667 Hz)"

Similarly, the acquisition duration may be slightly shorter in samples than the
wall-clock `duration_s` because the actual ODR is slightly lower. For example,
10 seconds at 26,584 Hz = 265,840 samples (~9.97 s at nominal). This is expected.

## Sensor Configuration Reference

See [sensor-specs.md](references/sensor-specs.md) for detailed sensor specifications
and recommended ODR (Output Data Rate) settings for different use cases.

## Example Interaction

**User**: "I want to start monitoring the vibration on our pump"

**Response approach**:
1. Ask about the pump type, RPM, and bearing information if known
2. `datalog2_connect` to the STWIN.box
3. `datalog2_list_sensors` to check current config; adjust if needed
4. `datalog2_start_acquisition(name="pump_baseline", duration_s=5)`
5. `load_signal(file_path="<folder>", sensor_name="iis3dwb_acc")`
6. `compute_fft_spectrum` + `assess_vibration_severity`
7. Present the FFT spectrum and ISO 10816 assessment
8. Suggest a monitoring interval (e.g., weekly for Zone A/B, daily for Zone C)
